COVID-19: How discourse differs between male and female politicians
In situations of crisis, language and communication matter — particularly at the highest levels of political leadership.
But do men and women use language differently when they are in positions of power? A new study sets out to investigate,
and MNT spoke to its authors about the implications of their research for global health policy. Share on Pinterest Hill
Street Studios/Getty Images Recently, there has been much discussion in the media about gender imbalance in the COVID-19
response. Journalists and scientists alike have drawn attention to the unequal representation in decision-making bodies,
the social impacts that disproportionately affect women or pose unique challenges for transgender people, and heightened
effects on other marginalized groups. In this context, a team of researchers set out to analyze another interesting
aspect of COVID-19 politics through the lens of gender: political discourse. Health inequities affect all of us
differently. Visit our dedicated hub for an in-depth look at social disparities in health and what we can do to correct
them. Sara Dada, from the Vayu Global Health Foundation, Boston, MA, is the study’s corresponding author. Other authors
on the paper include: Henry Ashworth, an MD candidate from the Harvard Medical School in Boston  Dr. Marlene Joannie
Bewa, MD, MPH, a research associate with the University of South Florida College of Public Health in Tampa and Interim
Board Chair for Women in Global Health in Washington, DC  Dr. Roopa Dhatt, executive director of Women in Global Health
The study — which has just been accepted for publication by the journal BMJ Global Health and due to appear in January
2021 — performed a “Political and gender analysis of speeches made by heads of government during the COVID-19 pandemic.”
In doing so, Dada, the corresponding author, and her colleagues analyzed 122 speeches on COVID-19 made by 20 leaders, 10
of whom were men, while 10 were women. The leaders were heads of government from the following countries: Bangladesh,
Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Dominican Republic, Finland, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, New Zealand, Niger, Norway,
Russia, South Africa, Scotland, Sint Maarten, United Kingdom, United States, and Taiwan. Using a deductive analytical
approach, the authors coded the speeches for specific themes based on the language that leaders used and the content
they discussed in their addresses. The research yielded five different themes across all speeches: economics and
financial relief  social welfare and vulnerable populations  nationalism  responsibility and paternalism  emotional
appeals  Fear-based tactics vs. social unity The study found that, although all leaders talked about the economic impact
of the pandemic, “women leaders spoke more frequently about the impact on a local or individual scale.” Furthermore,
women leaders described more often “a wider range of social welfare services,” such as those tackling “mental health,
substance abuse, and domestic violence.” Finally, “Both men and women from lower-resource settings described detailed
financial relief and social welfare support that would impact the majority of their citizen population.” “While 17 of
the 20 leaders used war metaphors to describe the COVID-19 virus and response, men largely used these with greater
volume and frequency,” report the authors. MNT spoke to the study authors about their findings. MNT: Were you surprised
by your findings? Sara Dada: While we expected to find some differences, we were surprised how stark the differences
were when it came to how men and women generated emotional engagement. Generally, men tended to rely more on fear-based
tactics by either using more frequent war rhetoric or blame, while women tended to stress more social unity through
personal examples and appeals for compassion. It was also interesting to see how heads of government varied in the types
of responses and initiatives they prioritized — for example, only women leaders announced initiatives to address
domestic violence. MNT: What are the implications of your research? Is there any public action that you would like to
see as a result of these findings? Sara Dada: The implication of our work is that communication matters. Every country
has responded to the pandemic in varying ways, led by different approaches and leadership styles. While it is important
to recognize differences in societies and cultural preferences that may influence the leadership of different countries,
we highlight how the language around the pandemic differs across these leaders and pose questions about what that means
long term. We know that leadership and public trust are imperative in responding to a health emergency, and how heads of
government communicate with their citizens influences that trust and, therefore, the future uptake of interventions. In
the short term, we would love to see more work and attention on this relationship to improve overall pandemic response.
In the long term, while we currently have a very small pool of female heads of government to even consider in such
analyses, we do see that there may be differences between men and women. And so we advocate for more equitable and fair
leadership that also represents the interests of all citizens.