How blood markers and wealth predict future health problems
Researchers at the University of East Anglia (UEA) discovered that wealth plays a crucial role in seeking preventive
healthcare. However, this was a secondary find, as their primary focus was on the concept of biomarkers predicting the
development of health problems and the need for future treatments. Share on Pinterest FatCamera / Getty Images It is
quite common for studies to find that, if left unaddressed, chronic stress and negativity can lead to developing severe
health problems. An unfortunate modern reality is that much of chronic stress has direct ties with socioeconomic
inequalities. A new study — which appears in the December 2020 issue of Economics & Human Biology — adds to this body of
evidence. Lead study author Dr. Apostolos Davillas from the UEA’s Norwich Medical School explains, “We [found] that
people’s biological health is linked with future demand on healthcare services, such as GP and outpatient consultations,
as well as time spent in the hospital.” Dr. Davillas led a team that studied blood biomarkers. Their intended goal was
determining if biological health could predict disease and the need for future medical treatments. Dr. Davillas and his
team set out to focus on blood markers to predict future health problems. However, the byproduct of their research
concerning wealth also came with crucial implications. Health inequities affect all of us differently. Visit our
dedicated hub for an in-depth look at social disparities in health and what we can do to correct them.  How the study
unfolded Before drawing their conclusions, the UEA team examined biomarkers for 5,286 people, who were the participants
in academic research for “Understanding Society,” the UK Household Longitudinal Study. Researchers examined multiple
facets of health data, including liver and kidney function, resting heart rate, cholesterol levels, blood pressure, and
lung strength. The team also considered inflammation and how their bodies reacted to infections or chronic stress.
Ultimately, the study results revealed biological clues acting as indicators of future health problems. According to Dr.
Davillas: “What we found is that underlying biomarker differences have links with future disability, and that we could
actually predict people’s level of disability in 5 years’ time, based on the biomarkers in their blood. “We tried to
investigate the mechanism for why this happens and found that people with impaired biological health may develop [a]
disability in 5 years’ time, resulting in increased healthcare and social needs.” When looking through the data, Dr.
Davillas and his team were able to observe wealth as a factor in participant behavior and future medical needs.
Additionally, the harsh impact of wealth disparity on the quality of access to healthcare plans and treatment also
played a role.  Wealth’s impact on stress, health, and healthcare access In an earlier study, Dr. Davillas linked
biomarkers for stress to a person’s socioeconomic status. Though this research initially focused on blood markers as
predictors for future health, his team could draw from previous studies linking wealth and health. This research seems
to validate perceptions that wealth correlates with a person’s willingness to engage general practitioners for
preventive care. It also indicates that healthcare professionals are far more willing to enable the very wealthy to
receive as much care as possible. The situation is problematic, as lower-income patients inevitably require frequent
medical treatment in the future, due to greater chronic stress and fewer available preventative measures. Dr. Davillas
comments, “In a publicly-funded healthcare system, pro-rich inequity in healthcare use may be because people on lower
low-incomes are heavily time-constrained due to harsher employment and living arrangements, and may be more constrained
in seeking the healthcare they need.”