2020 COVID-19 vaccine research: This year's landmarks
Since the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, researchers all over the world
have joined the race for an effective vaccine. Here is how the search for a vaccine progressed throughout the year.
Share on Pinterest skaman306/Getty Images March 11, 2020, is a day that many of us will remember for years to come. That
is when the WHO declared that the epidemic of infections with a previously undescribed human coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2,
had spread globally, qualifying as a pandemic. Since then, the world’s countries have cycled through restrictive
measures — ranging from physical distancing to full lockdowns — to try to keep the spread of the new coronavirus in
check. Throughout this period of anxiety and uncertainty, scientists and members of the public alike have shared one
mantra: The pandemic will subside once there is a commonly available vaccine against COVID-19, which is the respiratory
disease caused by SARS-CoV-2. Stay informed with live updates on the current COVID-19 outbreak and visit our coronavirus
hub for more advice on prevention and treatment. At the time of this feature’s publication, five vaccines have received
authorization from different countries around the world as safe and effective against COVID-19. How did we get here in 9
months? What routes did the science world take in the search for viable vaccines? In this Special Feature, we look at
the vaccine research highlights from March to December 2020.  Spring: The start of COVID-19 vaccine research Even before
the WHO declared the emergence of a pandemic, scientists had started looking for vaccine and therapeutic targets. In
early March, researchers from Germany and the United States had already submitted papers to the journal Cell discussing
potential mechanisms that might prevent infections with SARS-CoV-2. Their laboratory and animal research then suggested
that SARS-CoV antibodies might help block the virus’s entry into healthy cells, thus potentially reducing infections. In
mid-March, researchers from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the biotechnology company Moderna also started
enrolling the first volunteers to trial what has now become known as “the Moderna vaccine.” The Moderna vaccine uses a
relatively new technology that introduces genetic information about the virus into our cells to “train” the immune
system to recognize and react to SARS-CoV-2. This type of vaccine is known as an mRNA vaccine. At that point, the NIH
and Moderna were testing primarily for safety, to make sure that their vaccine candidate did not have major unwanted
effects on health. In April, researchers from the University of Oxford in the United Kingdom and the biopharmaceutical
company AstraZeneca started trials for their own vaccine candidate, now known as “the Oxford vaccine” or “AstraZeneca
vaccine.” Their research group used a weakened chimpanzee adenovirus, which is a common cold virus, to stimulate the
immune system and to deliver the genetic code for our cells to make the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. This protein allows
the new coronavirus to enter and infect our cells. By delivering this protein in viral particles that cannot cause
disease, the researcher’s aim was to safely introduce it into the human body to “teach” the immune system to react to
SARS-CoV-2, should it have exposure to this virus. At that point, the scientists from the University of Oxford and
AstraZeneca were hopeful that their vaccine would prove safe and effective and receive approval for public immunization
programs by fall 2020. A Chinese vaccine candidate also caught the attention of public health experts in April. That
month, researchers from the Chinese biotechnology company Sinovac Biotech tested a vaccine containing inactivated SARS-
CoV-2 in rhesus macaques. “What I like most [about this type of vaccine] is that many vaccine producers, also in lower-
middle income countries, could make such a vaccine,” said Prof. Florian Krammer, a specialist in immunology and virology
from the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai in New York City, NY. Prof. Krammer was not involved in this research.
In May, the Oxford vaccine was already entering phase 2 trials in humans. These trials aimed to find out if the vaccine
would affect immune systems differently depending on the participants’ ages. Also, researchers from the pharmaceutical
corporation Pfizer and the biotechnology company BioNTech started phase 1 trials, or safety trials, in humans for their
own mRNA vaccine candidate. Pfizer representatives expressed satisfaction with the short time it took them to take the
vaccine candidate from proof of concept to human trials. Dr. Albert Bourla, chairman and CEO of the pharmaceutical
corporation, declared that: “The short, less-than-4-month timeframe in which we’ve been able to move from preclinical
studies to human testing is extraordinary and further demonstrates our commitment to dedicating our best-in-class
resources, from the lab to manufacturing and beyond, in the battle against COVID-19.” Also in May, scientists from the
China National Institute for Food and Drug Control in Beijing, the Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, and the vaccine
company CanSino Biologics published the results of the phase 1 trial of yet another vaccine candidate. Their candidate
used an adenovirus that is no longer able to replicate, which carries the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein on its surface.
According to the researchers, the vaccine candidate was well tolerated at that point. When side effects did occur, they
tended to be mild. The investigators also reported signs that their vaccine candidate might be effective in fighting
SARS-CoV-2. According to lead researcher Prof. Wei Chen, from the Beijing Institute of Biotechnology in Beijing, “The
trial demonstrates that a single dose of the new vaccine [candidate] produces virus-specific antibodies and T cells in
14 days, making it a potential candidate for further investigation.”  Summer: The race against time continues In June,
Sinovac had made public preliminary reports that their vaccine candidate, known as CoronaVac, was safe, according to
phase 1 and 2 trials in humans. Since then, Sinovac experts have published the finalized report in The Lancet:
Infectious Diseases. By mid-July, the Oxford vaccine was already showing promise. All of the participants who received
the vaccine candidate in phase 1 had developed SARS-CoV-2-neutralizing antibodies, suggesting that it would be effective
in preventing the development of COVID-19. Prof. Andrew Pollard, a specialist in vaccinology and the chief investigator
in the Oxford vaccine trial, also noted that the vaccine might work best if healthcare professionals delivered it in two
doses: “We saw the strongest immune response in participants who received two doses of the vaccine, indicating that this
might be a good strategy for vaccination.” That same month, Sinovac launched a phase 3 trial of their vaccine candidate
in collaboration with Instituto Butantan in Brazil. CanSino also published promising results after their phase 2 trial,
which found that at 28 days after inoculation, a large majority of the trial participants demonstrated T cell responses.
This consolidated suggestions that the vaccine candidate might be effective against SARS-CoV-2. In August, Pfizer and
BioNTech also published early data from phase 1 and 2 trials of their mRNA vaccine candidate. The results confirmed the
vaccine candidate’s safety, and the researchers noted that any side effects were mild and short term. An increase in
antibodies following inoculation also suggested that the vaccine candidate might be effective in fighting SARS-CoV-2.
The researchers went as far as to call the immune response they observed in participants “robust.” These promising
results propelled Pfizer and BioNTech toward the phase 3 trial, as the team suggested in the study paper. “The clinical
findings for the […] vaccine candidate are encouraging and strongly support accelerated clinical development, including
efficacy testing, and at-risk manufacturing to maximize the opportunity for the rapid production of a SARS-CoV-2 vaccine
to prevent COVID-19,” the authors wrote.