What is bloodletting, and why was it a popular therapy?
Bloodletting — the practice of withdrawing blood from a person’s veins for therapeutic reasons — was common for
thousands of years. In this Curiosities of Medical History feature, we look at the history of bloodletting and how it
eventually fell out of favor with the medical community. Share on Pinterest Image credit: National Library of Medicine
Also known as phlebotomy — from the Greek words phlebos, meaning “vein,” and temnein, meaning “to cut” — bloodletting is
a therapeutic practice that started in antiquity. Today, however, the term phlebotomy refers to the drawing of blood for
transfusions or blood tests. Some sources suggest that the original practice of bloodletting is more than 3,000 years
old and that the Ancient Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans — as well as many other ancient peoples — all used it for medical
treatment. But what is the origin of the notion of bleeding someone to help them get better?  The theory of the 4 humors
Hippocrates — an Ancient Greek physician who lived in the fifth century before the common era and was one of the most
important figures in the history of medicine — practiced medicine according to the theory of the four humors, or
“humoral theory.” This theory posited that there were four key humors, or liquids, in the human body and that imbalances
in these humors were responsible for many physical and mental illnesses. According to the most influential version of
this theory, these humors were: black bile, yellow bile, phlegm, and blood. In the second century before the common era,
Galen — a famous Roman physician who also subscribed to the humoral theory — promoted arteriotomy, a bloodletting
method, as a means of reestablishing the balance of the four humors and treating a variety of symptoms. According to
Galen, a bloodletting incision into the veins behind the ears could treat vertigo and headaches, and letting blood flow
out through an incision in the temporal arteries — the veins found on the temples — could treat eye conditions. The
principle behind bloodletting is to remove some blood in a controlled way so that the patient does not end up bleeding
profusely. Article highlights: However, as some of Galen’s contemporaries observed, the famed physician could sometimes
get carried away when administering this treatment. Prof. Susan Mattern — a historian based at the University of Georgia
in Athens — emphasizes one such account in a paper in The Lancet: “[Galen] was an adamant defender of bloodletting
against those who doubted its efficacy. Galen’s methods could be very messy: he let so much blood from one patient that
the other doctors in attendance joked about it, comparing the sick man to a butchered animal: ‘Man, you have slaughtered
the fever.'” Bloodletting continued to play a role in medicine throughout Medieval Europe, and it persisted as a common
therapeutic method up until the 19th century, when it gradually started to fall out of fashion. The instruments that
physicians commonly used for bloodletting ranged from grotesque-looking scalpels to tools and methods that some
alternative medicine practitioners still use today. They included: fleams, which looked somewhat like Swiss knives,
producing several kinds of blades  spring lancets with a single thin blade  terrifyingly named “sacrificators,” which
had multiple blades  cups that the physician could place over the incision to collect the blood  leeches, which some
people still use for therapeutic reasons today  Bloodletting in the Middle Ages Bloodletting was particularly popular in
the Middle Ages, when doctors would use it not just to treat illness but also to prevent it. In the book, Medieval
Bodies: Life, Death and Art in the Middle Ages, Dr. Jack Hartnell — who is a lecturer in art history at the University
of East Anglia in Norwich, United Kingdom — describes some of the uses of bloodletting, as well as some of the ways in
which physicians carried out this procedure. Dr. Hartnell writes that according to medieval medical practice: “Purging
the wet and warm humor that was the blood both cooled and ventilated the patient’s core and was used as a prophylactic
insurance against illness to come: It could prepare the body for predicted future biological shifts or seasonal changes
that might push it into misalignment — anything from forthcoming menstruation to the onset of a particularly hot
summer.” As for applying bloodletting as a treatment, Dr. Hartnell notes that medieval physicians might opt for one of
two contrasting approaches. They would choose to make an incision either close to the part of the body requiring
treatment or in an opposite spot on the body that allegedly corresponded to the affected organ. Some medieval and
Renaissance-period medical treatises featured detailed illustrations of the points on the body where it was appropriate
to perform bloodletting incisions, depending on which body part an illness had affected. Similar medical illustrations
and practices extended as far as South Asia and the Middle East. In medieval and Renaissance Europe, bloodletting had
become so common a therapy that barber-surgeons practiced it. These individuals were men who could trim a person’s hair
or beard, as well as pulling out badly damaged teeth and withdrawing blood.  ‘People were… bled at their own request’ In
18th-century Europe, surgeons continued to use bloodletting as a treatment for fever, hypertension (high blood
pressure), inflammation of the lungs, and pulmonary edema (excess fluid in the lungs). Some physicians had even wider
uses for this allegedly therapeutic method. For example, John Hunter — one of the forefathers of modern surgery —
described various other uses for bloodletting, including in the treatment of smallpox or gonorrhea. In this latter case,
he advised bloodletting by leeches, which a doctor would have to affix to the patient’s testicles. Bloodletting was
still fairly common throughout the 19th century, though by the start of the 20th century, it was gradually becoming
unpopular with both the medical community and the public at large. Speaking of this practice’s popularity in the
mid-19th century, a consultant physician at that time, Dr. E. Copeman, wrote: “In my early days, bleeding was very
frequently resorted to in this hospital; and people were in the habit of coming to be bled at their own request, just as
they now apply to have their teeth drawn, and it was thought to be good practice for the students.” Bloodletting started
to lose ground in part thanks to the work of French physician Pierre-Charles-Alexandre Louis, who began questionning
this therapeutic method in the 1820s. Louis’s approach was to look at the number of patients who had received this
therapy and — taking into consideration the effect of other factors, such as age — to determine whether bloodletting had
actually done more good than harm. His conclusion, again and again, was that there was not enough evidence in support of
the idea that withdrawing blood could improve health. While he did not altogether reject bloodletting as a therapy,
Louis wrote that according to his observations, “the study of the general and local symptoms, the mortality and
variations in the mean duration of pneumonitis, according to the period at which bloodletting was instituted; all
establish narrow limits to the utility of this mode of treatment.”