Obesity: 5 common myths
Although obesity is common, there are many misconceptions associated with it — and these myths often fuel social stigma.
In this edition of Medical Myths, we tackle five of the most common misunderstandings about obesity. Share on Pinterest
Design by Diego Sabogal According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), in the United States, 42.4%
of adults have obesity. Globally, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimate that around 650 million adults have
obesity. People are growing increasingly aware of the health issues associated with obesity. However, despite public
health campaigns, myths continue unabated. Many of the most common myths drive stigma that can impact the mental health
of people with obesity. For instance, the results of one 2020 meta-analysis on the subject indicate “a stronger
association between weight stigma and diminished mental health with increasing body mass index [BMI].” Addressing the
myths that surround obesity is important. With this in mind, this article will tackle five of the most prevalent
misunderstandings around this condition.  1. To reduce obesity, just eat less and move more In many cases, consuming
more calories than the body needs for a prolonged amount of time is the direct cause of obesity. Indeed, the vast
majority of measures for reducing obesity aim to lower caloric intake, increase physical activity, or both. Although
diet and exercise are important factors, several unrelated factors can also play a significant part in obesity. These
factors, which people often forget about, include insufficient sleep, psychological stress, chronic pain, endocrine
(hormone) disruptors, and the use of certain medications. In these cases, overeating, for instance, may be a symptom
rather than a cause. Also, some of these factors work together to increase the chance of obesity. As an example, stress
can increase the chance of obesity. Due to the prevalence of weight stigma, obesity can be stressful for some people,
thereby increasing stress levels and sparking a negative feedback loop. Added to this, stress can impact sleep quality,
and this, in turn, might cause sleep deprivation, which is another factor in the development of obesity. Sleep
deprivation also appears to increase stress levels. As one paper explains, “stress hormone levels correlate positively
with decreased sleep duration.” Sleep apnea, wherein a person stops breathing for short periods during sleep, is more
prevalent in people with overweight or obesity. Again, a cycle can form: As they gain weight, their sleep apnea may
worsen, which can lead to sleep deprivation, which can lead to further weight gain. As another example, there appears to
be an association between chronic pain and obesity. The reasons for this relationship are sure to be complex and differ
from person to person, but they likely include chemical factors, sleep, depression, and lifestyle. It is not difficult
to see how chronic pain would both increase stress levels and impact sleep, adding to the negative loops outlined above.
Stress, sleep, and pain are just three interlinking factors that can drive obesity. Each person’s case will be
different, but simply receiving an instruction to “move more and eat less” might not be an adequate intervention. As
this article will continue to reiterate, calorie intake and exercise are vital factors in reducing obesity, but they do
not tell the whole tale.  2. Obesity causes diabetes Obesity does not directly cause diabetes. It is a risk factor for
type 2 diabetes, but not everyone with obesity will develop type 2 diabetes, and not everyone with type 2 diabetes has
obesity. Obesity is also a risk factor for gestational diabetes, which occurs during pregnancy, but it is not a risk
factor for type 1 diabetes.  3. People with obesity are lazy An inactive lifestyle is a factor in obesity, and becoming
more active can aid weight loss, but there is more to obesity than inactivity. One 2011 study used accelerometers to
measure the activity levels of 2,832 adults, aged 20–79 years, for 4 days. Their step counts reduced as their weight
increased, but the differences were not as significant as one might predict, particularly for women. The list below
shows the women’s weights and how many steps they took per day during this study: those with a “healthy” weight: 8,819
steps  those with overweight: 8,506 steps  those with obesity: 7,546 steps When one considers that someone with
overweight or obesity expends more energy with each step, the difference between the groups’ overall energy expenditures
may be even more slight. This does not mean that physical activity is not essential for good health, but the story is
more complex. Another factor to consider is that not all people are able to perform physical activity. For instance,
some physical disabilities can make moving challenging or impossible. Also, certain mental health issues can severely
impact motivation — and there appears to be a relationship between depression and obesity, which further deepens the
complexity. Aside from physical and mental health issues, some people with obesity may also have a negative body image,
which might make leaving their home a more daunting prospect.  4. If your close relatives have obesity, so will you The
relationship between obesity and genetics is complex, but someone whose relatives have obesity will not necessarily
develop the condition themselves. However, their chance of doing so is higher. Understanding the role of genes and the
environment in isolation is difficult; people who share similar genes often live together and, therefore, may have
similar dietary and lifestyle habits. In 1990, a group of researchers published a study that helped split genes from the
environment. The results appeared in The New England Journal of Medicine. The scientists investigated twins who had been
brought up apart and compared them with twins who had been brought up together. In this way, they hoped to tease apart
the impact of genetics and the environment. Overall, they conclude: “[G]enetic influences on [BMI] are substantial,
whereas the childhood environment has little or no influence.” One twin study from 1986 reached similar conclusions. The
researchers found that the weights of adopted children correlated with the weights of their biological parents, but not
with those of their adoptive parents. Although more recent studies have identified a more significant role for the
environment, genetics do appear to play an important part in obesity. In recent years, scientists have searched for the
genes that influence the chance of obesity. As the CDC explain, in most people with obesity, “no single genetic cause
can be identified. Since 2006, genome-wide association studies have found more than 50 genes associated with obesity,
most with very small effects.” One gene that is linked to obesity is a variant of a gene called FTO. This variant,
according to one 2011 study, is associated with a 20–30% increased chance of obesity. Although genetics are important,
this does not mean that obesity is inevitable for someone whose relatives have the condition. The above study, which
involved individuals with the FTO gene variant, looked at the role of exercise. As the paper explains: “Using data from
over 218,000 adults, the authors found that carrying a copy of the susceptibility gene increased the odds of obesity by
1.23-fold. But the size of this influence was 27% less in the genetically susceptible adults who were physically
active.” A review and meta-analysis that investigated the same gene variant came to a similar conclusion. The authors
explain that people with the FTO variant “respond equally well to […] weight loss interventions and thus genetic
predisposition to obesity associated with the FTO minor allele can be at least partly counteracted through such
interventions.” However, it is important to reiterate the point that these interventions alone may not be helpful for
some people.