Could a supplement be as effective as exercise at protecting health?
New research suggests that a common dietary supplement, glucosamine, may help reduce overall death risk to a similar
degree as regular exercise. Share on Pinterest Witthaya Prasongsin/Getty Images Two researchers from West Virginia
University (WVU), in Morgantown, recently found that individuals who took glucosamine/chondroitin — one of the most
common kinds of glucosamine supplements — on a daily basis for at least 1 year saw a 39% reduction in mortality from all
causes of death and a 65% reduction in the likelihood of death from cardiovascular disease. The study appears in the
Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine. However, Dr. Dana King, the lead author of the study and chair of
Family Medicine at WVU, does not advise people to replace exercise with the supplement. “That’s not what we suggest,”
King explains. “Keep exercising. But the thought that taking a pill would also be beneficial is intriguing.”  A popular
supplement Glucosamine/chondroitin, a combination of two natural compounds found in cartilage, is widely used to help
with osteoarthritis and joint pain. During 2020–2024, the global glucosamine market is expected to grow by $229.19
million, according to Technavio, a global technology research and advisory company. While the supplement is popular,
however, several clinical trials have failed to show that it provides a significant improvement in pain. Still, the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) report that oral glucosamine supplements are “likely safe” when taken correctly by
adults.  ‘The impact was pretty significant’ In their study, Dr. King and Jun Xiang, a health data analyst at WVU,
assessed data from 16,686 adults who had completed the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) between
1999 and 2010. All of the participants were at least 40 years old. NHANES was designed to be an ongoing assessment of
the health and nutrition status of people throughout the United States. Screeners interview participants at their homes,
and later, NHANES staff members perform examinations in mobile centers to collect health and nutrition data. The WVU
study was particularly interested in participants who had taken glucosamine/chondroitin for at least 365 days before
their interviews. Among the participants, 658, or nearly 4%, had taken glucosamine/chondroitin for a year or longer.
When Dr. King and Xiang merged the NHANES data with 2015 mortality figures, they found that there had been 3,366 deaths
among the participants and that 674 deaths had resulted from cardiovascular disease, the leading cause of death in the
U.S. The authors caution that the 39% reduction in all-cause mortality and 65% reduction in death from cardiovascular
disease that they observed among the participants who took glucosamine/chondroitin may have a simple explanation: People
who use supplements may generally take more care with their health and be healthier overall. However, the researchers
stress that they did control for variables such as age, race, sex, education, and the frequency of exercise, making the
simple explanation less likely. “Once we took everything into account, the impact was pretty significant.” – Dr. Dana
King