Resiliency helps older adults deal with the pandemic
A recent article in JAMA discusses why older adults appear to be coping better with loneliness and social isolation than
younger adults during the COVID-19 pandemic. Share on Pinterest Lucy Lambriex/Getty Images Pandemics are stressful, and
the loneliness that comes with isolation takes a toll on mental health. Surveys from the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) conducted between June 24 and June 30, 2020, found that 40.9% of respondents experienced at least one
mental or behavioral health condition. These ranged from symptoms of anxiety, depression, and trauma to starting or
increasing substance use. While all humans need social contact, some cope better with less contact than others. Stay
informed with live updates on the current COVID-19 outbreak and visit our coronavirus hub for more advice on prevention
and treatment.  Young and old Social deprivation, the reduction or prevention of levels of social interaction considered
normal depending on culture, is particularly harmful for adolescents. A 2020 review of studies investigating social
isolation and loneliness, published between January 1, 1946, and March 29, 2020, found that these factors strongly
predicted later depression in children, adolescents, and young adults. Additionally, loneliness correlated with an
increased risk of mental health problems up to 9 years later in life. An April 2020 article from the European Paediatric
Association investigated adolescent mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic. The researchers reviewed data from
preliminary studies in China and found that those aged 3–18 were more clingy, distracted, irritable, and fearful of
asking coronavirus-related questions. They also had trouble sleeping, poor appetites, and separation problems. Young
adults are also vulnerable to the psychological effects of social isolation. An October 2020 studyfound that in a group
of 564 adults aged 22–29 years, 60.7% of whom were female, loneliness increased between January and April–May. This
effect was more prevalent in females, as were increased symptoms of depression. Social isolation can also cause physical
symptoms, such as a weakened immune system, an increased risk of diabetes, and an increased risk of death. A 2016 study
found a strong link between a poor social life and an elevated risk of inflammation during adolescence. In older adults,
a lack of social interaction is linked to a greater risk of hypertension, compared with diabetes. The CDC cite 2020
estimates that one-third of adults aged 45 or older feel lonely, and almost 1 in 4 adults 65 or older are socially
isolated. This is associated, they report, with health risks, including higher rates of depression, anxiety, and
suicide. However, while older adults may be experiencing significant social isolation from loved ones, this may not
necessarily translate into worsening mental health, according to a recent Viewpoint article in JAMA.  Older adults less
severely affected A group of researchers at institutions in Massachusetts, California, and Pennsylvania looked at early
data from several global studies on older adults and mental health during the pandemic. While older adults are
considered a vulnerable population for severe COVID-19 and related mortality, the researchers found that these adults
were less negatively affected by mental health strain than younger adults. One report from the CDC, for example,
concluded that older adults were less likely to start or increase substance use and less likely to think about suicide.
Of course, these findings do not apply to every older adult. In the same report, the CDC acknowledge that adults from
marginalized groups or low-income households, and those who provided unpaid caregiving services were more likely to
experience adverse health effects. This is consistent with other evidence of higher levels of anxiety, depression,
stress, and post-traumatic stress disorder in people of color, compared with white people, during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Factors affecting resiliency in older adults Based on the evidence, the authors suggest that older adults better
withstand the mental health strains of the pandemic thanks to increased resilience and a drive to stay connected with
others. They explain that some global studies have shown that resilience is linked to maintaining meaningful
relationships with others and access to mental health care. “However, despite this early resilience, older adults
expressed concerns about their longer-term physical and financial well-being,” the authors caution. Resilience might
also be linked with wisdom. The analysis found that having wisdom is associated with higher levels of compassion and
less loneliness.