11 myths about losing weight
As 2021 begins, many of us might be planning to lose some weight. However, when it comes to dieting and weight loss,
confusion abounds. Here, we dispel 11 widely held myths. Share on Pinterest Design by Diego Sabogal During the holiday
season, many people take on more calories than they work off. Consequently, adding a little extra weight at this time of
year is not unusual. Classically, January is a time of change, and many people go on health kicks that include weight
loss. With that in mind, we address some common misconceptions.  1. Skipping breakfast aids weigh loss The common adage
that breakfast is the most important meal of the day may or may not be true, but it seems unlikely that skipping the
morning meal aids weight loss. The rationale behind this strategy is that missing one meal a day leads to a lower
overall intake of calories. However, the story is not so straightforward. One study, published in 2010, analyzed food
intake information from 2,184 people aged 9–15 years. Twenty years later, the researchers asked for the same information
again. They compared data from people who had skipped breakfast during childhood and adulthood with data from those who
had never skipped breakfast or had done so only in adulthood. Compared with the other groups, the participants who
skipped breakfast during both childhood and adulthood tended to have larger waist circumferences, higher fasting insulin
levels, and higher total cholesterol levels. Sometimes, people who skip breakfast eat more during the rest of the day to
counteract the deficit. But one 2013 study found that missing breakfast does not lead to eating more at lunch. The
authors conclude that “Skipping breakfast may be an effective means to reduce daily energy intake in some adults.”
However, these researchers only monitored the participants’ food intake at lunch, not dinner. And the study only
included 24 participants, so we should be wary of drawing solid conclusions from the findings. A much larger 2007 study,
which involved more than 25,000 adolescents, looked for links between skipping breakfast and having overweight. The
researchers also assessed the roles of alcohol intake and levels of inactivity. The scientists found that skipping
breakfast had a stronger association with overweight than either alcohol consumption or levels of inactivity. A 2020
systematic review and meta-analysis that appears in the journal Obesity Research & Clinical Practice concurs. After
analyzing the results of 45 previous studies, the authors concluded: “Skipping breakfast is associated with
overweight/obesity, and skipping breakfast increases the risk of overweight/obesity.”  2. ‘Fat-burning’ foods can aid
weight loss Certain foods are referred to as “fat-burning.” This sounds too good to be true, and it probably is.    Some
people claim that foods such pineapple, ginger, onions, avocados, asparagus, celery, chilies, broccoli, green tea, and
garlic speed up the body’s metabolism, thereby helping the body burn fat. There is little scientific evidence, however,
that these foods can help reduce weight. Learn more in our video below:  3. Weight loss supplements can help Proponents
of certain supplements claim that they, too, help the body burn fat. In reality, these are generally ineffective,
dangerous, or both. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) report that they have “found hundreds of products that are
marketed as dietary supplements but actually contain hidden active ingredients […] contained in prescription drugs,
unsafe ingredients in drugs that have been removed from the market, or compounds that have not been adequately studied
in humans.” Jason Humbert, a senior regulatory manager at the FDA, adds: “We’ve also found weight loss products marketed
as supplements that contain dangerous concoctions of hidden ingredients, including active ingredients contained in
approved seizure medications, blood pressure medications, and antidepressants.”  4. Low fat foods aid weight loss Of
course, reduced fat or low fat foods are likely to contain less fat. However, these products sometimes compensate with
added sugar or salt. Checking labeling is key. Also, it is worth noting that “reduced fat” does not necessarily mean
“low fat,” but simply that the fat content of a product is lower than the full-fat version.  5. Thou shalt not snack
People may believe that snacking is a cardinal sin of dieting. In some cases, though, snacking can help people manage
their caloric intake more effectively. It is not so much snacking itself, but what one snacks upon that that counts.
Snacking may be more complex than it first appears. While some snack on celery and others on cookies, some people might
snack because they are hungry and others because they are bored. Having a piece of fruit or some low fat yogurt between
meals, for instance, might reduce food cravings, keeping a person from overeating at mealtimes or resorting to more
energy-dense snacks. Some research has shown that people with obesity are more likely to snack than people without the
condition. In this case, switching from unhealthful to healthful snacks may aid in weight loss, if this is a goal. In
general, snacking is multifaceted — it may support or hinder weight loss efforts, and in some cases it may have little
effect. Older research, from 2007, investigated the role of snacking in weight loss. In the yearlong study, the
researchers asked one group of participants to have three meals a day, without snacking. A second group was asked to
have three meals and three snacks daily. Individuals in both groups consumed equivalent amounts of energy each day. At
the end of the study, the authors found no difference in weight loss between the two groups; snacking, it seems, neither
helped nor hindered. Another study, from 2011, investigated the “relationship between eating frequency and weight loss
maintenance.” The researchers recruited participants who had previously had overweight or obesity but who had since
maintained healthy weights. They compared these individuals’ eating patterns with those of people with obesity and
people with healthy weights who had never had overweight. The team found that participants with healthy weights ate more
snacks than those who had lost weight — and that people with overweight ate the fewest snacks. Overall, the authors
concluded that “Eating frequency, particularly in regard to a pattern of three meals and two snacks per day, may be
important in weight loss maintenance.”  6. No treats allowed This follows on from the myth above. Of course, limiting
sugary, high fat treats is important, but cutting them out entirely is unnecessary and could be counterproductive. As
the British Heart Foundation explain: “Depriving yourself of all the foods you enjoy won’t work. You’ll eventually give
into temptation and abandon your efforts. There’s no harm in allowing yourself a treat now and again.”  7. Some sugars
are worse than others There is a rumor that minimally processed sugars, such as those in maple syrup or honey, are more
healthful than white sugar. In reality, our bodies process sugar in the same way — regardless of its source. The gut
reduces all sugars into monosaccharides. Rather than looking at sugar processing, it is more important to note the
amount of sugar in any food. All types of sugar provide around 4 calories per gram.  8. Cut out all sugar Following on
from the myth above, we know that all sugar is high in calories. However, a person looking to lose weight does not need
to mercilessly cut sugar from their diet. As with all things, moderation is key. It may instead be a good idea to avoid
products with added sugar.  9. Artificial sweeteners are healthful To lower their sugar intakes, many people opt for
low- or no-calorie sweeteners, such as aspartame. This may reduce the number of calories consumed, but some studies have
linked artificial, or nonnutritive, sweeteners to weight gain. A systematic review and meta-analysis published in 2017
analyzed 37 existing studies involving a total of 406,910 participants to investigate the impact of sweeteners on
cardiometabolic health. According to the researchers, “Observational data suggest that routine intake of nonnutritive
sweeteners may be associated with increased BMI [body mass index] and cardiometabolic risk.” However, not all studies
have reached this conclusion. Researchers and health experts continue to discuss the effects of nonnutritive sweeteners
on weight loss and metabolic health.  10. You can target fat in specific areas Some people are particularly keen to lose
fat from certain areas, such as the thighs or abdomen. In reality, this targeting is not possible. All bodies respond
differently to weight loss, and we cannot choose which bits of fat will go first. However, if weight loss is paired with
exercises to tone a particular area, it can give the impression of more region-specific weight loss.  11. This fad diet
is excellent Vast legions of diets have become fashionable only to fade into obscurity, making room for more. As the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) explain in a nutshell: “[Fad] diets limit your nutritional intake, can
be unhealthy, and tend to fail in the long run.”