Premature babies: 'Most will do very well,' says expert
When babies are born prematurely, caregivers and hospital staff rightly worry. However, as Dr. Mercurio, a professor of
neonatology from Yale School of Medicine, explains, ‘the outcomes will be good’ for most of these babies. Share on
Pinterest Image credit: Jill Lehmann/Getty Images Premature babies are born before 37 weeks of pregnancy. Each year,
this is the case for about 15 million babies across the world and 10% of babies born in the United States. For
caregivers, a premature birth and the time spent in the hospital afterward can be exceedingly worrying and stressful.
But the care of premature babies has improved immensely in the last 50 years. In this Special Feature interview to mark
Prematurity Awareness Month, Medical News Today spoke to Dr. Mark Mercurio, a professor of pediatrics (neonatology) and
the chief of Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine at Yale School of Medicine in New Haven, CT. Dr. Mercurio is also the director
of the Program for Biomedical Ethics and the director of the Yale Pediatrics Ethics Program. In this interview, Dr.
Mercurio explains why taking care of premature babies is challenging, how this care has changed during his career, and
what research he is keen to see. He also tells us what he wants caregivers of premature babies to know. We have lightly
edited the interview transcript for clarity.  Better equipment and a better understanding Medical News Today: What are
the biggest challenges that healthcare professionals face in the care of premature babies? Dr. Mercurio: There are many
challenges, really, but we could break these down into the technical and medical challenges and then the psychological
and ethical aspects. There are technical challenges in part just because the patients are so small. This can make things
more difficult. For example, most people are familiar with the fact that sometimes it can be hard to place an IV in an
adult or an older child. So you can imagine the technical difficulties in someone who weighs just a pound or two. In
terms of the medical aspects, every organ system is immature. A primary example is the lungs. The challenge is to ensure
that enough oxygen can get into the blood via the lungs, and this is often much more difficult with premature,
underdeveloped lungs. To accomplish this, there are various modes of assisted ventilation that might be needed. In the
brain, there is a possibility of injury because the baby is born very early. That has to do with the immaturity of the
brain structurally at the time of delivery and possibly further injury during the intensive care course. We know that
premature babies, especially those born extremely premature, are at increased risk for long-term problems with brain
function. A third example would be the gastrointestinal system, which is also immature. So, getting adequate nutrition
into these children can sometimes be a challenge. MNT: How has the care of premature babies changed during your career,
and what has made the biggest impact on this? Dr. Mercurio: The care of premature babies has changed in many ways over
the course of my career. We are constantly evaluating the data. We are constantly evaluating outcomes. There are
controlled trials [happening all the time] to establish which is the better way to [provide care]. So, care evolves
based on the new data, based on the outcomes of the studies that we do, and that is always a work in progress.
Neonatology, like all of medicine, is rightfully always changing as we learn more. I think we ventilate babies very
differently. For example, the use of respiratory support for babies with immature lungs has evolved significantly over
the course of my career and has gotten much better. We have better equipment, and we also have a better understanding of
how to go about it.