Large study finds clear association between fitness and mental health
New research from a large study demonstrates that low cardiorespiratory fitness and muscle strength have a significant
association with worse mental health. Share on Pinterest Luis Alvarez / Getty Images Researchers have reported a clear
link between low physical fitness and the risk of experiencing symptoms of depression, anxiety, or both. The study,
which included more than 150,000 participants, found that cardiorespiratory fitness and muscle strength independently
contribute to a greater risk of worse mental health. However, the researchers saw the most significant association when
they looked at cardiorespiratory fitness and muscle strength in combination. The research, which appears in the journal
BMC Medicine, may help inform clinical guidance on mental health and physical fitness.  Physical and mental health
Problems with mental health, just like physical health issues, can have a significant negative effect on a person’s
life. Two of the more common mental health conditions are anxiety and depression. According to the Anxiety and
Depression Association of America, 18.1% of adults in the United States have experienced an anxiety disorder in the past
year. In addition, the National Institute of Mental Health note that 7.1% of U.S. adults have had a major depressive
episode. There is growing evidence that being physically active may help prevent or treat mental health conditions.
However, many questions still need answering. For example, what measures should researchers use to quantify physical
activity? In what ways can it prevent mental health issues or improve a person’s mental health? And is it possible to
demonstrate a causal link between physical activity and better mental health? It is important to have detailed evidence
of the relationship between physical activity and mental health, as well as the mechanisms that might underlie it. With
this information, clinicians can offer more targeted guidance to people with mental health conditions. To begin to
answer some of these questions, a team of researchers analyzed an existing large dataset that allowed them to build on
their understanding of the association between physical fitness and mental health.  A study of 152,978 participants In
the present study, the researchers drew on data from the U.K. Biobank — a data repository comprising information from
more than 500,000 volunteers aged 40–69 years from England, Wales, and Scotland. Between August 2009 and December 2010,
a subset of the U.K. Biobank participants — amounting to 152,978 participants — underwent tests to measure their
fitness. Investigators assessed the participants’ cardiorespiratory fitness by monitoring their heart rate before,
during, and after a 6-minute submaximal exercise test on a stationary bicycle. They also measured the volunteers’ grip
strength, which the researchers of the present study used as a proxy for muscle strength. Alongside these physical
fitness tests, the participants completed two standard clinical questionnaires relating to anxiety and depression to
give the researchers an overview of their mental health. After 7 years, the researchers assessed each person’s anxiety
and depression again using the same two clinical questionnaires. In their analysis, the researchers accounted for
potential confounding factors, such as age, natal sex, previous mental health issues, smoking status, income level,
physical activity, educational experience, parental depression, and diet.  A clear correlation The researchers found a
significant correlation between the participants’ initial physical fitness and their mental health 7 years later.
Participants who were classified as having low combined cardiorespiratory fitness and muscle strength had 98% higher
odds of experiencing depression and 60% higher odds of experiencing anxiety. The researchers also looked at the separate
correlations between mental health and cardiorespiratory fitness, and mental health and muscle strength. They found that
each measure of fitness was individually associated with a change in risk but less significantly so than the combination
of measures. According to Aaron Kandola, the lead author of the study and a doctoral candidate in the Division of
Psychiatry at University College London, United Kingdom: “Here, we have provided further evidence of a relationship
between physical and mental health and that structured exercise aimed at improving different types of fitness is not
only good for your physical health, but may also have mental health benefits.” – Aaron Kandola